---
title: "Quasar Exhibits 10x Superluminal Motions at Inferred Distance"
controversy: "Halton Arp, the Modern Galileo"
discourse_level: "worldview"
authors: ["worldviewer"]
date: "2017-04-30"
lastmod: "2017-04-30"
project_url: ""
categories: ["astronomy", "astrophysics", "cosmology", "redshift", "quasars", "halton arp", "superluminal quasar motions", "3c273", "3c279", "3c278", "ngc4783", "3c275", "quasar flares", "halton arp's website", "virgo cluster", "relativity"]
metrics: []
---

If quasar redshifts are due to velocity, they should be so incredibly distant that proper motion is undetectable.

We know this to be the case due to published remarks by Maarten Schmidt in a 1963 Nature article titled "3C 273: A Star-like Object with Large Red-Shift":

_"Only the detection of an irrefutable proper motion of parallax would definitely establish 3C 273 as an object within our Galaxy."_

M. Schmidt, “3C 273: A Star-like Object with Large Red-Shift,” Nature 197 (March 16, 1963), p. 1040.

Now, consider the exemplary journalism below within the context of that quote:

http://discordancy.report/3c-279-and-3c-273/

_"... Quasar 3C 279 is one of the brightest gamma ray objects in the sky.  And with a redshift of .536 z as listed in NED it is assumed to be quite distant at almost 6.9 billion light-years away using a so-called Hubble Constant value of 55 (km/s)/Mpc.  However, accepting such a distance would make this object one of the most energetic and powerful radiation emitters in the known Universe by many orders of magnitude._

_3C 273 is the first celestial object ever identified as a quasar.  It is also assumed to be one of the closest to Earth with a redshift of .158 z which supposedly places it at a distance of 2.5 billion light-years when using the same Hubble Constant.  3C 273 is the brightest quasar in the night sky with an apparent magnitude of 12.9 which makes it visible to even amateur astronomers’ telescopes.   At its accepted distance this brightness equates to an absolute magnitude of 26.7 which also makes this quasar one of the most luminous in the known Universe._

_The radio source 3C 278 is associated with the galaxy NGC 4782 and its companion NGC 4783.  NGC 4782 is the host of 3C 278 and has a redshift of .013 z which gives it an assumed distance of 234 million light-years.  NGC 4783 is the northern galaxy in most images of the pair and has a redshift of .154 z which would place it 270 million light-years distant.  However both objects are themselves connected by a bridge of material and appear less than 40 arcseconds apart._

_Quasar 3C 275 has a large redshift of .480 z which presumably puts it at a distance of 6.3 billion light-years away.  Again, as with all the aforementioned 3C radio sources, distances were calculated using a Hubble’s 'Constant' of 55 (km/s)/Mpc._

_How can such widely separated objects be bridged with such a highly energetic field of material on such an enormous scale?  According to their accepted distances 3C 279 and 273 alone are roughly 1 billion light-years apart in the sky and over 4 ¹/₂ billion light-years apart in distance from Earth.   There are over 6 billion light-years separating the closest objects from the furthest objects in this group.   There is no real conceivable way such a body of mass and energy could exist in the Universe unless it was actually much closer to us than had previously been assumed.  Greatly reducing the actual distances to these bright radio sources also resolves a very surprising discovery made when observing the cores of the two brightest objects, 3C 279 and 273 using the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA) and other radio telescopes._

_Jets of material have long been observed being ejected from the cores of these two quasars.  But prolonged observation and analysis using radio telescopes have revealed that these jets appear to be ejecting material at several times the speed of light!  The image to the right was provided courtesy of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory / Associated Universities, Inc. (NRAO/AUI) which operates the VLBA and other radio telescopes.   It is a time-lapsed mosaic of 3C 279 and a stream of material that has been ejected from its core.  As indicated by the markings along the axis the bright blob of material at the end of the stream traveled roughly 25 light-years over a period of only 7 years.  This would place the velocity of the stream at approximately 3.6 times the speed of light!  There have even been jets of material observed in 3C 273 that appear to be traveling at almost ten times the speed of light!  How can this be possible when the speed of light cannot be broken?  The latest and most accepted explanation proffered by scientists is that these superluminal velocities are merely optical illusions.  These illusions are supposedly generated by relativistic effects caused by the jets traveling very close to the speed of light and at very small angles to the line-of-sight of the observer.  However, the length and collimated nature of the jets preclude the possibility that we just happen to be observing both quasars with their jets pointed almost directly at us.  Therefore relativistic effects, if they even do exist, would not be the cause of these observations._

_This leaves only two other possibilities.  Either the laws of physics have been broken and the speed of light has been exceeded by several-fold, or the quasars simply aren’t as far away as most astronomers believe them to be.   The latter possibility is at least testable using simple mathematics.  For example, if 3C 279 was actually located less than 2 billion light-years from Earth, instead of the almost 7 billion as generally believed, the superluminal velocities of its jet would be reduced to subluminal speeds due to reduction in scale.  Similarly, reducing the distances for all of the aforementioned quasars greatly reduces the overall expected scale of the surrounding gamma ray bridge and required power output of the encompassed quasars.  But changing the accepted distances calls into question the accuracy of distance measurements based on redshifts believed to be caused by universal expansion.   And of course calling universal expansion into question calls the Big Bang Theory into question, and thus the controversy."_

_Bye Bye Big Bang: Hello Reality_ (2002)
William C. Mitchell

_"Superluminal Quasar Flares._

_An additional redshift problem has to do with quasar flares that appear, as observed by radio astronomy, to exceed the velocity of light. That appearance is the result of the perceived great distances of the quasars from which those flares originate. However, it can be shown, by some simple, but somehow quite confusing trigonometry, that flares having relativistic velocities that are ejected at angles of less than 90 degrees toward (or away from) the observer can create the appearance of superluminal velocities._

_Because of the great energies required to propel flares to near superluminal speed it is difficult to account for the large number of quasar flares that are reported to exhibit that phenomenon. One might expect such flares to be observed only infrequently; and because the acceleration of particles of matter to superluminal speed requires infinite energy, it is impossible to account for those that might actually exceed the speed of light._

_It may be more reasonable to conclude that the perception of flares at such speeds is due to the accepted interpretation of redshift data. The mathematics that is used to provide the appearance of those great speeds is directly dependent on the perceived distance of the quasar under consideration, which, in turn, is dependent on that method._

_The trigonometry mentioned above can show that flares having near relativistic velocities, that are ejected at angles of less than 90 degrees toward (or away from) the observer, can create the appearance of superluminal velocities. Furthermore, mathematical investigation of the velocity relationships of those quasars and their associated superluminal flares, provides unintelligible results._

_The erroneous perception of superluminal flares is illustrated by an example of a quasar flare traveling at 95 percent of the speed of light, but at an angle of 36.87 degrees from directly toward us (using a 3-4-5 right triangle for this example, which has been chosen merely for convenience.) Analysis shows that, when observed at intervals, that flare would appear to travel an arc of 0.57 lightyears (³/₅ x 0.95c) in an interval of 0.24 year (the speed of light less the transverse component of travel = 1 - (⁴/₅ x 0.95c), thus appearing to travel at a speed of about 2.375 times the speed of light across the sky._

_In another example, a flare at that same angle, traveling at 90 percent of the speed of light, would appear to travel an arc of 0.54 light-years (³/₅ x 0.9c) in an interval of 0.28 year (the speed of light less the transverse component of travel = 1 - (⁴/₅ x 0.9c), thus appearing to travel at a speed of about 1.929 times the speed of light. If the flare speed was 0.9 c, but at an angle 30 degrees, the apparent velocity works out to 2.04 c. At that same speed, but at an angle of 45 degrees, the apparent velocity would be 1.75c._

_Examples of other angles and other flare speeds would, [of] course, produce different apparent velocities. But it appears that, depending on the actual speed and relative angle of travel, quasar flare apparent speeds of about twice the speed of light might be common._

_Because the speed of a quasar flare can only be observed by the astronomer as an angular speed, its apparent transverse speed can only be determined by knowledge of its distance. That information is provided by the distance of the associated quasar that, in turn, is determined by the accepted interpretation of redshift data for that quasar. If that quasar has a redshift of 2, for example, it might have been thought to be at 8 BYRs distant (perhaps 80 percent of 10 billion light years) that might result in a flare having an apparent transverse velocity of 2.375c. But, if it was 800 MLYs distant, the velocity of the flare would be 10 times less, or only 23.75 percent of the speed of light._

_Because flares might be expected to depart in opposite directions from a quasar with approximately equal speeds, the examination of that possibility illustrates a serious difficulty regarding the observation of apparent velocities of quasar flares. In the first example given above, the same apparent tangential speed would also be observed, in the opposite direction, for a flare of the same quasar that travels away from us, and appearing to travel at the same speed in the opposite direction._

_The radial speed of the flare moving toward us would be 0.76c (⁴/₅ x 0.95). If the associated quasar also had a flare in the opposite direction at the same speed relative to the quasar, its radial speed would be at 0.76c away from us. If the quasar had a redshift of 2, and thus, in accordance with Figure 4, a speed away from us of 0.8c, the flare traveling radially away from us at 0.76c would have a radial speed of 0.04c (toward us!) relative to its quasar; and the flare traveling radially toward at 0.76c us would have a radial speed of 1.56c toward us relative to its quasar._

_The only reasonable explanation that can be suggested for those results is that the present method of determining the relative speed and distance of remote massive bodies is incorrect._

_As an example of a related topic, John Gribbin in Space Warps wrote that 'although radio galaxy 4C 345 is 5 BLYs away [according to the accepted interpretation of redshift data],' its enormous lobe of radio emission 'is twice as large in the night sky as the moon.' If it were at that distance, the length of that lobe would be 'an astonishing 78 million light-years.' If that galaxy were the size of the Milky Way the tangent of its observed angle would be about 4 arc-seconds. The angle of the moon is about 32 arc-minutes. If the galaxy were at the the stated distance, the flare would be about 960 times the size of its galaxy, or about 96 million light-years. That great length should also prompt question about the accepted method of velocity and distance determination._

_The only possible explanation for the perceived irrational relationships between quasars and their flares is that those quasars are not moving away from us with the great speed that has been determined by the accepted method. On the large scale, the universe [cannot] be expanding at the perceived great rates._

_Quasars with Opposing Flares._

_When I first examined the problem of superluminal quasar flares, I knew of no instance of a quasar having what were thought to be superluminal flares in opposite directions, and had therefore suggested that, if such a configuration were to be found, it might be used to provide some answers regarding the discrepancies described above. I suggested that might be done by determining and analyzing the redshifts and angular velocities of opposing flares of quasars from their source quasar._

_Several years later observation of superluminal 'gas jets' in opposite directions from a source known as GRS 1915+105, estimated to be 40,000 light years distant, and thought to be either a small black hole or a 'microquasar', were reported. (In this case GRS doesn't mean gravitational redshift.) Those observations were made in England in 1997 using an array of radio telescope that is called MERLIN (for multi-element radio-linked interferometer network). The combined signals from those telescopes is reported to result in a resolution of 40 milliarcseconds._

_Calculations based on the inbound flare estimated at 0.9c, appearing to be at at a speed of 2c, and on similar geometry to that described above, show the GRS 1915+105 inbound flare coming toward us at an angle of about 30 degrees from radial, and outbound flare going away from us in the opposite direction._

_Unfortunately GRS 1915+105 is not at a 'cosmic' distance, but within our own galaxy. Because of its very low redshift, observations of it and its flares can't contribute to the solution of possible redshift problems regarding opposing flares of quasars that are billions of light years distant and thought to be departing at relativistic speeds._

_A similar appearing nearby, 'mini-quasar' or miniature black hole, having jets in opposite directions had been reported in 1995. The jets of GRO 1655-40, estimated to be 10,000 to 15,000 lightyears distant are reported to appear to have speeds of 1.5 c._

_I recently discovered a report (of 1997) that distant quasar NGC 6251 has 'two monstrous jets of gas in opposite directions.' If the redshift of that quasar, and the angular velocity of its two jets relative to the quasar, were to be determined, that information might shed some light on the true nature of the problem of the measurement of distance (and velocity) of remote bodies in intergalactic space (IGS)._

_Now that such a quasar has been found, it provides hope that efforts might be made to determine and analyze the relative velocities of a quasar and its flares in order to explain the inconsistencies described above. Unfortunately, rather than just weeks required for the measurement GRS 1915+105 flare speeds, it might take much longer to obtain adequate data regarding the flares of quasars at great distances. But the results of that investigation might provide valuable information regarding the interpretation of redshift data of distant quasars._

_An investigation of the kind that I proposed years ago, and again propose here, might provide convincing evidence that the presently accepted interpretation of redshift data is invalid, and that the universe on the whole is not expanding. That would be worth knowing!"_

A footnote on 3C273, from the archives of Arp's own website ...

http://web.archive.org/web/20061109193924/http://www.haltonarp.com/?Page=Abstracts&ArticleId=6

_"An especially embarassing skeleton in the intervening galaxy closet is the brightest apparent magnitude quasar in the sky, the famous 3C273 at z = .158. Evidence since 1966 places this brightest of quasars in the center of the Local Supercluster even though [its] redshift is 52 times greater. After Hubble Space Telescope took an ultraviolet spectrum, it was proudly announced that it contained unexpectedly many absorption lines with redshifts reaching up to that of 3C273. I said at the meeting at which it was announced that it was 'unlikely that there would be ten times as many clouds of various redshift all stretched out just behind the Virgo Cluster reaching in the direction of the far background 3C273.' It seemed like evidence that material of different redshifts was in fact present in the Virgo Cluster along with the protype quasar. There has been silence since then on this point."_